Not fun, not very F1 like and
anti-racing. Max Vstappen's thrown a
grenade on F1's new 2026 rules in the
middle of testing. John Noble, you were
there. Why does Max hate these cars? It
was a fascinating press conference today
uh just 24 hours after Mercedes boss
Toto Wolf labeled Red Bull the
benchmark. Basically said, Max Vstappen
looks, you know, game on for the
championship. The Red Bull energy
deployment is is great. You thought,
well, we'll go to a press conference and
Max is surely going to say, actually,
yeah, these are quite good. I'm kind of
enjoying it. Complete opposite. Uh, I've
not witnessed someone be so critical of
a regulation set like this in his
position. As you said, anti-racing, not
a lot of fun, to be honest. He said, it
feels like FE on steroids. The racing's
less pure. It's not F1. Uh, he says
maybe it's just better to drive in
Formula E. It's just not fun. So, this
was about energy deployment. basically
he doesn't like the fact the lift
they're having to lift and coast.
Doesn't like the fact they're having to
manage energy. Doesn't feel like proper
racing. He just wants to drive a normal
racing car as traditionally he has done
in Formula 1. It's the closest we've
come so far to the situation we had when
the the turbo hybrids first came in in
2014 and Sebastian Vettle the reigning
world champion dominant very critical
about different aspects of it the
competitiveness of the the new formula
the noise of the new formula and so on
and so forth hasn't quite reached sort
of widespread critical mass in the way
that that was but it's sort of move in
that direction we're going to come on to
a bit more on that uh in a moment but
Max obviously tying this interestingly
to his own future too. Now, this is a
topic that won't really disappear and
he's mentioned a few times he's unhappy
with various elements about Formula 1,
including the rules direction, and he
was asked about that, wasn't he, in the
media session and made it pretty clear
where he stands.
Yeah, we've had this message from a lot
of drivers saying, "I don't particularly
like these 2026 regulations, but any
driver that's winning is going to love
them." Lance Stroll told us on Monday,
if George Russell wins the Australian
Grand Prix by 30 seconds, he's gonna say
these rules are great. M.
So, you would expect Max to say, "Yeah,
actually they're they're fine, but not
at all. There's the lack of fun." And he
said, "Even even to him, a winning car
is not enough. It's got to be fun." And
he was asked a question about, "Well,
what does this mean for your future?
You've made clear you'll only continue
to stay in Formula 1 if it is fun." And
he said, "Well, it's it's obvious I'm,
you know, considering other options
outside of Formula 1 where I can have
some fun. One of which could be the the
Norife 24 hours, for example." So he's
clearly unhappy with things and he's it
was quite interesting. He said, "Look, I
understand my team's made a lot of
effort. We've put a lot of work into
Rebel powertrains. I know I'm going to
make some people unhappy making these
criticisms, but he says he has the right
to be critical if he's not happy and
he's not happy."
Well, let's get into a little bit more
detail about that stuff that makes him
unhappy because you're right, it's all
about the way that the engines work
within this. And this has been a talking
point for so long with these rules, the
need to make the the the cars and the
sporting regulations sort of twisted
around these 50/50 or nearly 50/50
engines between internal combustion
engine and electric power. So you've got
this massive massive emphasis on
recharging, whether that is the lift and
coast, the the weird downshifting, high
revving, other tactics that teams and
engine manufacturers have been have been
working out. And drivers basically have
to drive a certain way to do that. And
basically like he has a pretty good
chance of being fast in these rule sets
because he's matched for stappen and
also because it looks like Red Bull's
done a good job, but he clearly doesn't
like the way that it's going to that
being fast is done in these cars. But
how much of a point does he have? Are
are these are these rules terrible? Are
they doomed from the outset?
I think there are two issues or or two
kind of conflicting thoughts with these
cars. On the one hand, there's a ton of
power. We've got 1,000 horsepower, which
is what F1 cars should be, and a lot of
acceleration. We've seen the cars
sliding a lot coming out of corners,
which is good. The problem is, and this
has been an issue we've known for years,
the energy starved. There isn't enough
energy to run that maximum power out of
corners. And I think what's hit home,
not only to Max, but a couple of other
drivers, is just the tactics that are
needed to be quick. So, it's no longer a
case, as it's been in Formula 1 for
decades, that the driver that can
effectively break later into a corner,
take that corner faster than another
driver, get on the throttle earlier, and
come out quicker, is the best. Now, you
can be quicker by lifting off and lift
and coasting for an extra 200 m, which
gives you more battery power. It's a
completely different way of racing, and
for drivers like Max, it's not fun. The
one thing that is probably worth
stressing is that a track like this,
there are massive opportunities to to
charge the battery. So, it doesn't
surprise me that teams are trying to do
that and exploit that as much as
possible with the long straights and
then the big braking zones. But also,
those long straits mean you are then
deploying a lot um a lot more than you
would on a conventional track, let's
say, or certainly a track like Monaco.
But the problem that the problem is is
that it's it's not the first driver to
sort of break rank a little bit from the
kind of veneer of the excitement and new
2026 rules. Lewis Hamilton's talked
about it as well. So it's interesting
that some cracks are starting to show.
Yeah, we had the first hints of that
last week. Obviously the Barcelona test
was closed. Everything was very
controlled by Formula 1. All the the
interviews effectively were done by
Formula 1 people. The questions weren't
very probing on the regulations, what
was good, what was bad. But since then,
we've spoken to some drivers. Essan
talked about following not being so
easy. We got the first hints of uh this
kind of lift and coast thing being a bit
strange. And then you spoke to Lewis
Hamilton yesterday. You were at his
press conference. He was equally not so
delighted despite Barcelona having
appeared to be quite positive.
Yeah. And he stands by that in terms of
the cars being sort of more fun to
drive. They move around a bit more. Max
doesn't seem to like the fact that
they're less grip, but a lot of other
drivers are actually quite positive
about that. They are smaller. Smaller
always looks better and faster on track.
So, I think all of that stuff is valid.
It's the engine side of things. Lewis
stands by his comments that the cars are
more fun, but he doesn't like the fact
that he's saying they're doing like 600
m of lift and coast around a qualifying
lap. He said that that's not racing. Um,
he said none of the fans will understand
it because it's ridiculously complex and
you need a degree to understand it all.
We've obviously been digging into
various details about that, including,
for example, the race starts and all the
stuff going on there. It it is fair to
say it's a very complicated rule set
once you start digging into the details.
Yeah, we found out lots more about these
these regulations and race starts for
example, you know, used to be you need
just needed to balance the revs at the
right point. Put your clutch in, find
the bike point, bang, go. Now you need
to spool the turbo up for 10 seconds so
the turbos running at the right speed.
You need to balance that against battery
demands. So the battery power will
increase, but you can't hit peak power
because that's detrimental to
performance. You need to get the right
revs as well then for the getaway, but
you can't use your battery till you hit
50 km an hour. It's now triggered a
safety debate about these starts are too
maybe too difficult. Maybe there's be
too many slow starts which opens the
risk of crashes off the grid. So there's
lots of complexity coming in. There's
lots of debate happening and I think
think the reason the cracks are
appearing now is that drivers are
starting to push the performance.
They're realizing where things are
going. Barcelona was about mileage. It's
about understanding you how's it going?
Pound in the laps. Now you're trying to
find out where are these temps coming
from. And even Max said, as you saw him
yesterday write that great piece about,
you know, dropping down into first gear,
a different gear change, trying to find
benefits. He's still finding
performance. He's still seeking
performance. But at the end of the day,
I think that the unique thing with Max
is he can be quick. He could potentially
be winning races and going for the
championship, but he's not going to be
happy about the way it's being done.
There would be such a shame having
watched these cars a lot trackside so
far this week, and and they do look
better. In my opinion, they do look
better on track than their Grand Effect
predecessors. And a few drivers have
back back that up. It'd be such a shame
if that potential is lost because of
everything else that sort of cra it's
crammed around or the way that the
engines actually operate, the way they
have to be operated, the whatever
sporting situation we end up with with
twisting the start procedure to make
that work. It might just get a little
bit over the top, but are we is this
going to come to a head? Because we know
that the management of the messaging
around 2026 is something F1's a bit
sensitive towards. Max is the most
outspoken we've heard so far. Might
other drivers follow his lead? And is
this all going to come to a head when we
get to Australia and the cars are
actually unleash for real such that
unleashing the 2026 cars will be
potentially. It could get worse in
Melbourne. Melbourne's been one of the
most difficult tracks for energy
management. There's not many breaking
places. There's a lot of places you can
deploy. So, I think they're going to be
even more energy starved than they are
here when it comes to that lap. And it
could well trigger that if the racing
isn't very good. If we have a qualifying
that's decided by who lifted and coasted
for the longest distance going into turn
one, is that Formula 1? Are the fans
going to like it? And if the drivers
don't like it, they're going to be
speaking out a lot.
